
===== PAGE 1 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
1 
 
High-resolution taxonomic profiling and metatranscriptomics identify 
microbial, biochemical, host and ecological factors in peri-implant disease 
Short title: Peri-implant ecosystem 
 
Szymon P. Szafrański1,2,3,$,*, Amruta A. Joshi1,2,*, Matthias Steglich1,2, Ines Yang1,2, Taoran Qu1,2, Wiebke 
Behrens1,2, Uthayakumar Muthukumarasamy4, Damianos Melidis5, Paula Schaefer-Dreyer1, Jasmin 
Grischke1, Jan Hegermann6, Wolfgang Nejdl5,7, Susanne Häussler3,4,8,9, and Meike Stiesch1,2,3,$ 
1Department of Prosthetic Dentistry and Biomedical Materials Science, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany 
²Lower Saxony Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Implant Research and Development (NIFE), Hannover, 
Germany 
3Cluster of Excellence RESIST (EXC 2155), Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany 
4Department of Molecular Bacteriology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany 
5L3S Research Center, Leibniz University Hannover, Hannover, Germany 
6Research Core Unit Electron Microscopy, Institute of Functional and Applied Anatomy, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany 
7Knowledge-based Systems Laboratory, Leibniz University Hannover, Hannover, Germany 
8Institute for Molecular Bacteriology, Twincore, Centre for Clinical and Experimental Infection Research, Hannover, 
Germany. 
9Department of Clinical Microbiology, Copenhagen University Hospital - Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark 
*Szymon P. Szafrański and Amruta A. Joshi contributed equally 
$correspondence to: Meike Stiesch: Email: Stiesch.Meike@mh-hannover.de (lead contact) and Szymon P. 
Szafrański: Email: Szafranski.Szymon@mh-hannover.de 
 
Abstract word count = 239 
 
 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 2 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
2 
 
Abstract 
Biofilm-associated diseases like peri-implant mucositis (PIM) and peri-implantitis (PI) are significant 
clinical challenges affecting millions of dental implant patients globally. Although studies have described 
the role of microbial, host, or environmental factors in disease development, their complex interplay, 
particularly during dysbiosis remains poorly understood. This cross-sectional study characterized the 
microbiome composition and metatranscriptomes of 125 peri-implant biofilms from 48 individuals 
uncovering molecular signatures linked to peri-implant health (PIH), PIM, and PI. Distinct variations were 
observed in biofilm amount, composition, activity, phage populations and host response. Biofilms were 
categorized into four community types (CTs) based on the bacterial transcriptional activity: one linked to 
PIH, one to PI, and two to PIM. PIH and PIM were primarily characterized by aerotolerant taxa with 
increased anabolic processes, while PI was dominated by obligate anaerobes with complex biofilm 
morphology, and heightened catabolic activity and virulence. PIM samples, relative to PIH were 
characterized by biofilm expansion with minimal functional changes, except for the Neisseria-rich PIM 
subtype showing higher pyruvate and lipoic acid metabolism. The phagome mirrored the bacterial 
compositional variations across disease states. Furthermore, human transcriptome responses varied 
indicating increased keratinization in PIH, enhanced expression of ribosome components in PIM, and 
inflammatory signaling and hypoxia in PI. Additionally, we identified complex species-enzyme, phage-
bacteria, and host-microbe associations within the peri-implant ecosystem. Our integrative multi-omics 
approach provides a comprehensive view of microbial, biochemical, host, and ecological factors associated 
with dysbiosis, offering novel insights into peri-implant disease dynamics. 
Importance 
Peri-implant mucositis and peri-implantitis are highly prevalent inflammatory conditions that compromise 
the long-term survival and success of dental implants, yet their underlying biological mechanisms are largely 
unresolved. While next-generation sequencing has advanced our understanding of microbial composition 
across health and peri-implant diseases, it falls short of capturing microbial activity and the broader 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 3 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
3 
 
molecular context of peri-implant dysbiosis. Metatranscriptomics overcomes this limitation by profiling 
actively transcribed genes within the biofilm, offering direct insights into microbial community functions. 
In this study, we integrated full-length 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing with metatranscriptomic 
profiling to simultaneously assess microbial taxonomy, functional activity, phage dynamics, and host gene 
expression in peri-implant biofilms. Importantly, we provide a systems-level view and report previously 
undescribed associations between different molecular signatures in peri-implant ecosystem. 
 
Introduction 
Millions of patients have received dental implants as an effective solution for tooth replacement1. 
However, the growing number of dental implant placement has been a accompanied by a rise in biofilm-
associated peri-implant diseases. Peri-implant mucositis (PIM), a reversible infection of the peri-implant 
mucosa, has a prevalence of 43%, while peri-implantitis (PI), which involves progressive loss of the 
supporting bone, affects more than 25% of implants within five years of placement2, 3. These peri-implant 
diseases impact patients’ quality of life and pose a substantial public health burden4. The primary etiological 
factor for both PIM and PI is an imbalance within the microbial community characterized by uncontrolled 
biofilm expansion and the emergence of more virulent species5-14. This dysbiosis triggers a host immune 
response which, if unsuccessful in clearing the infection, becomes dysregulated8, 15, 16. The resulting immune 
dysfunction leads to tissue destruction, creating an environment that further promotes dysbiosis. 
Traditionally, peri-implant disease has been considered closely related to periodontal disease, however, 
emerging evidence suggests that the two ecosystems differ significantly5, 8, 14, 17. While inter-subject 
variability in the submucosal microbiome has been observed among individuals with peri-implant disease, 
it remains unclear whether distinct community types, similar to those identified in periodontal disease, 
exist18, 19. 
Despite advances in molecular methods, the mechanisms underlying the development of the 
complex, multifactorial peri-implant conditions remain to be elucidated8, 20. Metataxonomics and 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 4 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
4 
 
metagenomics overcame the limitations of early culture-based and DNA-hybridization methods, and 
enabled comprehensive profiling of the peri-implant microbiome and its functional potential7, 11, 12, 14. 
However, short-read 16S sequencing lack high resolution of taxonomic diversity (except metagenomics) 
and falls short in providing direct insights into bacterial activities, which can be uncovered by 
metatranscriptomics (MTX). Additionally, MTX provides a unique perspective on interspecies interactions, 
enabling predictions about their role in ecosystem dynamics and the development of dysbiosis21, 22. 
Interestingly, MTX sequences from peri-implant biofilms also contain host and bacteriophage RNA offering 
important insights into host-biofilm and phage-bacteria interactions23, 24. However, technical challenges 
have limited the application of MTX on peri-implant biofilms, confining previous studies to two small 
patient cohorts5, 16. 
A multi-omics approach, integrating full-length 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing (full-16S) 
and MTX, represents a promising research direction for characterizing biofilm interactions and revealing 
the underlying mechanisms of microbiome dynamics and disease development25-28, especially considering 
the complex and multi-dimensional nature of the submucosal ecosystem22. In this study, we employed paired 
full-16S and MTX in the largest cohort of dental implant patients to date, aiming to advance a systems-level 
understanding of the peri-implant disease etiology. This integrative approach allowed a comprehensive 
characterization of the peri-implant ecosystem across three diagnosis groups, including the compositions 
and activity of bacterial species and their community types, bacteriophages, enzymes, host genes, as well as 
key interactions among these components. 
 
Results 
In this study we analyzed the peri-implant microbiota composition and activity, including bacteriophages, 
and patient transcriptional responses from 125 implants in 48 patients (Fig. 1a). Implants were categorized 
based on their peri-implant disease status according to the ‘Classification of Periodontal and Peri-Implant 
Diseases and Conditions’29. 56 implants were diagnosed as healthy (PIH), 37 with peri-implant mucositis 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 5 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
5 
 
(PIM) and 32 with peri-implantitis (PI). PI-associated implants showed significantly higher plaque index 
scores, poor oral hygiene, probing depths, suppuration and history of periodontal disease (Supplemental 
Table 1). PI was characterized by a higher incidence of pus formation and pain. We obtained paired full-
length 16S rRNA gene amplicon profiles (full-16S) and metatranscriptomes (MTX) for 125 implants. We 
performed full-16S instead of shotgun metagenomics. While shotgun approaches can complement MTX as 
a mapping reference, they are less feasible here due to the extremely low biomass of peri-implant biofilm 
samples, especially from healthy sites. We used an RNA-focused co-isolation protocol to preserve RNA 
integrity, which limits DNA quality. Full-16S allowed high-resolution taxonomic profiling from the same 
RNA-coisolated samples used for MTX, helping to minimize batch effects from separate sampling. In this 
setting, it provided a practical and informative alternative. Multiple samples per patient captured variability. 
Profiles were averaged by diagnosis to control for patient effects. MTX data concurrently assessed bacteria 
(MTX-B), phages (MTX-P), and host response (MTX-H). Comprehensive details on sequencing results are 
available in Supplemental Table 2. 
 
Peri-implantitis exhibits dominance of anaerobic taxa, including many unnamed fastidious species 
To identify the relative abundances of taxa that are  differentially associated with PIH, PIM and PI, we 
analyzed the composition of peri-implant communities (Supplemental Table 3). Major compositional  
differences occurred at the class level between disease states (Supplemental Fig. 1, PERMANOVA pseudo 
F =3.15, P=0.0028). PIH and PIM were generally characterized by a high abundance of aerobic or 
aerotolerant microorganisms of Bacilli, Actinobacteria, and Gammaproteobacteria while PI showed 
dominance of strict anaerobes represented by Bacteroidia, Clostridia, and  Deltaproteobacteria (Kruskal 
Wallis adj. P ≤ 0.05). The biofilm composition in PIM was intermediate between that of PIH and PI, more 
closely resembling PIH (PERMANOVA P = 0.65 versus P = 0.01 for the PIM-PI comparison).  
Abundances of PI-associated classes positively correlated with clinical indicators of disease severity 
(Supplemental Fig. S1c and d). Few outlier samples with taxonomic profiles not typical for a given 
diagnosis group were observed. 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 6 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
6 
 
At lower taxonomic levels, we identified a total of 99 different genera and 756 species-level 
phylotypes (Fig. 2, Supplemental Table 4, 5). Microbial diversity, as reflected by the Shannon diversity 
index (H’) was higher in PI compared to PIH (3.4 ± 0.5 vs 3.1 ± 0.5, mean ± SD, P = 0.02). In total, 23 
genera and 28 species were dominant (average relative abundance of ≥ 1% in at least one diagnosis group), 
30 genera and 34 species were core (present in ≥ 75% of samples in at least one group), and 13 genera and 
63 species were associated with different diagnosis groups (FDR-corrected P < 0.05, Supplemental Table 
4, 5). At the genus level, Streptococcus was dominant and core in both PIH and PIM. PIM showed 
significantly higher abundances of Shuttleworthia, while Aggregatibacter and Peptostreptococcus were less 
abundant compared to PIH. PI showed expansion of Dialister, Mogibacterium, Prevotella, Parvimonas, 
Pseudoramibacter, Eubacterium outgrowing Streptococcus and 4 other genera when compared to PIH and 
PIM. At the species level, abundant species formed three major clusters of samples, each primarily 
associated with one diagnosis group (Fig. 2). In our study, we identified 228 of the 325 unnamed provisional 
species from the oral cavity30, assigned with Human Microbiome Taxon (HMT) numbers. Of these, 157 met 
the relative abundance threshold of 0.1% across all samples (Supplemental Table 5). These species 
corresponded to a mean of 9.3% of the analyzed communities (maximum 36%) with Fusobacterium sp. 
HMT-203 being the most abundant. Unnamed species with HMT numbers were more abundant in PIM 
(10.6 ± 7.7, mean ± sd, P = 0.013) and PI (12.1 ± 6.8, mean ± sd, P = 0.0004) compared to PIH (7.0 ± 5.9). 
In summary, microbial communities on implants exhibited a remarkable complexity, comprising a 
substantial proportion of understudied and yet unnamed species. Notably, overall microbial diversity and 
abundance of anaerobic taxa increased in PI. 
 
Peri-implantitis is characterized by high bacterial RNA yields and complex biofilm morphology 
To capture microbial community functions beyond the microbiota composition detailed above, we 
incorporated a metatranscriptomic perspective in our investigation. The amount of bacterial RNA isolated 
from peri-implant samples and reflecting absolute levels of biofilm activity, was determined by multiplying 
the total RNA by the proportion of reads mapped to bacteria. The results were validated by the rRNA signals 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 7 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
7 
 
observed in Bioanalyzer profiles of the total RNA. The total amount of bacterial RNA varied significantly 
across diagnosis groups (Kruskal-Wallis, H = 24.5, P = 4.7 ∙ 10-6). The median bacterial RNA amount 
increased from 1 ng in PIH to 10 ng in PIM (post-hoc Dunn's test, Bonferroni-adjusted P = 0.0096), and 50 
ng in PI (P =  2.1 ∙ 10-6 and P =  0.04 compared to PIH and PIM, respectively). A striking difference of four 
orders of magnitude was observed in bacterial RNA levels across samples, ranging from 0.05 ng to 1,500 
ng. Notably, samples with exceptionally high RNA yields corresponded to high amounts of plaque observed 
macroscopically during sampling and processing. Electron microscopy was performed on four PI samples 
with extensive biofilm colonization to characterize their morphology (Fig. 1b, Supplemental Fig. 2). These 
biofilms displayed complex structures which included cell filaments, bacterial aggregates, extracellular 
networks and localized granules of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), as well as features involved 
in biofilm stability, communication and dispersal/remodelling, such as vesicles and motile flagellated cells. 
 
Metatranscriptomics revealed four major active community types (CT) in peri-implant biofilms 
Metatranscriptomics allowed us to capture significant differences in activity distribution by analyzing the 
overall mRNA abundances across bacterial classes (Fig. 3, Supplemental Fig. 3). Based on their activity 
profiles, biofilms at class level showed statistically significant clustering (type 1 SIMPROF test, 
significance level of 0.1%). Importantly, clustering was not based on arbitrary similarity thresholds but was 
determined using the SIMPROF (similarity profile) algorithm, which employs permutation-based testing to 
identify statistically significant groupings within hierarchical clustering, thereby offering a robust approach 
to identify genuine clusters. Nine clusters of active communities, with four major clusters (community types 
CTs I-IV, Fig. 3a) covering most samples, were identified. Each CT displayed a unique profile of active 
bacterial classes. CT I was primarily associated with PIH samples and negatively associated with clinical 
measures reflecting disease severity. CT II almost exclusively included PIM samples, while CT III exhibited 
PIM as the highest proportion. CT IV had the highest proportion of PI samples. Within some individuals, 
some biofilms from different implants with the same diagnosis showed distinct CTs (Fig. 3b). CT I was 
characterized by high Bacilli activity; mainly from Streptococcus. CT II was dominated by 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 8 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
8 
 
Betaproteobacteria activity, particularly Neisseria. CT III showed elevated activity of Bacteroidia 
(Prevotella) and Fusobacteriia (Fusobacterium), while CT IV exhibited even higher Bacteroidia activity, 
specifically from Tannerella and Porphyromonas, in contrast to CT III along with increased Fusobacteria 
activity. The species co-occurence network visualized through ordination showed unique networks of 
pairwise correlations between active species within CTs. CT II displayed the highest number of co-occuring 
taxa (Fig. 3d). Hence, clustering of active biofilm profiles identified four major community types, with CT 
II and CT III being predominantly associated with PIM. 
 
Microbial biofilm changes in peri-implantitis trigger numerous catabolic and a few specific anabolic 
pathways 
Next, we analyzed changes in transcriptome-level enzyme expression, categorizing them into Enzyme 
Commission (EC) numbers, which provide a numerical classification for enzyme-catalyzed reactions. 
Taxon-independent analyses offer the advantage of capturing microbial functions rather than focusing on 
specific taxa. Given the strong patient-specificity of peri-implant biofilms and the functional redundancy 
among microbes, this approach enables detection of consistent, cross-patient signals that may be missed by 
taxon-focused methods. RNAseq generated a total of 2.6 billion reads across 98 samples, with an average 
of 26 million reads per sample. The identified transcripts were linked to 1824 ECs, of which 36% had a 
relative abundance of at least 0.1% in at least one sample. The overall expression patterns in PI were distinct 
from both PIH and PIM (PERMANOVA p = 0.0001), whereas PIH and PIM comparison did not show 
significant differences in their EC based profiles (p = 0.488) (Supplemental Fig. 4). Using CAP and DEseq2 
analyses, we identified ECs with a significantly elevated expression in individual diagnosis groups 
(Supplemental Table 6). We then mapped these diagnosis-group associated ECs onto KEGG pathways to 
assess their associations within specific KEGG modules or sequential reaction chains (Fig. 4). ECs 
positively associated with PIH or PIM, were – in comparison to PI – primarily linked to anabolic processes, 
including the synthesis of multiple amino acids, glycerolipids, pyrimidines, and purines, as well as to 
pathways involved in denitrification, the pentose phosphate cycle, glycolysis, and the citrate cycle. ECs 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 9 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
9 
 
positively associated with PI represented catabolic processes, such as degradation of multiple amino acids, 
acyloglycerols, and galactose. Additionally, some ECs involved in biosynthetic pathways, such as those for 
isoprenoids, purines, and serine, as well as carbon fixation and gluconeogenesis, were also positively 
associated  with PI.  
PIM samples representing CT II and CT III differed by the expression of 219 ECs (P < 0.05, 
Supplemental Table 7). PIM CT II was mainly linked to pyruvate and lipoic acid metabolism, while CT 
III was characterized by lysine degradation and butanoate metabolism, which are functionally 
interconnected. Finally changes in amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism was observed in both PIM-
associated CTs. This data, along with biofilm biomass estimates derived from bacterial RNA yields, 
indicates that the difference between PIH and PIM is predominantly driven by biofilm expansion with 
minimal functional changes. In contrast, the PIM and PI differences involves both biofilm expansion and 
significant functional alterations.  
 
Key microbial players demonstrate class specific functions 
To understand the physiology and functional roles of microbial members within the biofilm, we examined 
class-specific activities in peri-implant biofilms (Fig. 5, Supplemental Table 8). Ordination (Fig. 5a) and 
clustering (Fig. 5b) revealed unique activity fingerprints for each class, consistent across diagnosis types 
(Fig. 5b). Pairwise comparisons of the four most active bacterial classes (P < 0.05), identified class-
associated ECs that were subsequently grouped into KEGG maps (Fig. 5c). Bacilli, associated with 
PIH/PIM (often representing CT I), exhibited higher activity in carbohydrate, nucleobase, and pyruvate 
metabolism, as well as the pentose phosphate pathway. Negativicutes, also PIH/PIM-associated, showed 
enriched nucleobase, porphyrin, lipopolysaccharide, and amino acid metabolism. Bacteroidia, PI-associated 
as well as abundant and highly active in CT III/CT IV, were characterized by amino sugar, purine, and one-
carbon metabolism. Fusobacteria exhibited porphyrin metabolism, similar to Negativicutes. 
To uncover the ecological functions of peri-implant microbial classes, we linked the ECs to their 
ecological roles and associated metabolites, analyzing the top 60 most highly expressed features across 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 10 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
10 
 
diagnosis groups and CTs (Fig. 5d, Supplemental Table 9). Glycosidases from Bacilli and peptidases from 
Bacteroidia, known to participate in enzyme sharing for synergistic degration of host derived polymers like 
salivary glycoproteins31, 32, showed the highest expression in PIH/PIM and PI, respectively, with β-
galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.23) and Arg-gingipain (EC 3.4.22.37) being the most highly expressed enzymes. 
H2O2 production (EC 1.2.3.3), primarily driven by Bacilli and Negativicutes-driven H2O2 detoxification (EC 
1.11.1.6) was observed in PIH and PIM. Among oxidative stress related enzymes, peroxidases (EC 
1.11.1.15) showed the overall highest expression. Hexosyltransferases activities from Bacilli  were 
indicative of carbohydrate polymer biosynthesis, while butyrate and polyamine production driven by 
Fusobacteria was associated with PI. Notably, the PIM CT II subtype exhibited unique activities, including 
oxygen depletion (EC 1.9.3.1), succinate/fumarate metabolism (EC 1.3.5.4), denitrification (EC 1.7.2.4/5), 
and glycogen synthesis (EC 2.4.1.21), highlighting distinct ecological adaptations in peri-implant biofilms. 
 
Bacteriophage activity clusters with different types of peri-implant disease 
Despite their critical role in shaping bacterial populations and influencing biofilm physiology, the peri-
implant phageome remains poorly characterized33. To replicate, bacteriophages must hijack the host 
bacterial machinery. As a result, MTX captures transcripts derived from active phages and phage-like 
elements, providing a functional readout of phageome activity. Using the IMG/VR database as a reference, 
we assessed transcription levels of phage-like genes, grouped as provisional species-like vOTUs (i.e., viral 
operational taxonomic units representing sequence bins). Ordinations based on phage data showed distinct 
separation between PIH, PIM, and PI samples (PERMANOVA P = 6 ∙ 10-5). CAP and DEseq2 analysis 
revealed phage species (vOTUs) associated with each diagnosis group (Supplemental Fig. 5, 
Supplemental Table 10). Analysis of phage hosts revealed high activity of phages targeting typical oral 
microorganisms with distinct patterns across diagnosis groups. However, a significant fraction of phage 
activity remained unassigned to specific bacterial hosts (Fig. 6a). Phages targeting Fusobacterium and 
Prevotella exhibited higher activity in PI than in PIH or PIM, where phages targeting Streptococcus and 
Haemophilus were more active (Fig. 6b). Additionally, Veillonella phages showed greater activity in PIM 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 11 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
11 
 
compared to PI. The Streptococcus phage, vOTU 20193, exhibited the overall highest average relative 
activity of 6.6% across all samples (Fig. 6c). In conclusion, variations in the active phageome across 
diagnosis groups reflected changes in both the abundance and activity levels of phage hosts. 
 
Peri-implant disease exhibits distinct host response to biofilm  
Detection of intact human ribosomal RNA, indicating higher transcript integrity, enabled minimally 
invasive transcript-level analysis of host activity at the local host–microbiome interface  We examined the 
expression of approximately 35,000 human genes (excluding low-count genes) around dental implants 
across diagnosis groups using DESeq2 and CAP analysis (Supplemental Fig. 6). The host gene expression 
patterns in PI differed significantly from both PIH (PERMANOVA P = 0.011) and PIM (PERMANOVA P 
= 0.004). In contrast, the comparison between PIH and PIM showed no significant differences in their 
profiles (P = 0.33). DESeq2 analysis revealed 102 differentially regulated genes when comparing PI and 
PIM with 32 genes upregulated and 70 downregulated in PI (DESeq2 adj P < 0.05) and the smallest number 
of differentially regulated genes in PIM vs. PIH comparison (3 genes upregulated in PIM). Using CAP 
analysis, we identified the top actively expressed genes (filtered at a 0.1% maximum cut-off) which showed 
a high correlation (ǀ r ǀ > 0. 25) with diagnosis groups. We further identified enriched GSEA hallmark gene 
sets, which represent specific well-defined biological processes and canonical pathways, associated with 
diagnosis groups (adjusted P < 0.05, tested for CAP outputs, Fig. 7). This analysis showed that keratinization 
was linked to PIH, while increased expression of genes relating to translational activity was characteristic 
for PIM compared to PIH. PIM samples representing CT II and CT III differed by the expression of only 12 
host genes. Comparisons between PIH vs. PI and PIM vs. PI revealed similar host pathways associated with 
both PIH and PIM, primarily linked to keratinization and translation. An increased abundance of transcripts 
associated with hemidesmosome assembly was notably characteristic of PIM in the PIM vs. PI comparison. 
PI signature pathways were largely consistent across comparisons, predominantly associated with TNF-
alpha signaling via NF-κB, inflammatory responses, cytokine signaling, interferon signaling and hypoxia. 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 12 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
12 
 
In summary, the host response in PIH and PIM was similar, reflecting an intact epithelial barrier and 
housekeeping functions, while PI was strongly associated with inflammation and related signaling. 
 
Multi-omic integrative analysis revealed complex interactions in the peri-implant ecosystem 
We leveraged our multi-omics, multi-layered dataset to trace key interactions within the peri-implant 
ecosystem. by investigating  pairwise interactions among bacterial species abundances (full-16S-based), 
enzymes, phages, and host genes (all MTX-based), using hierarchical association testing (Fig. 8). This was 
followed by integrative analyses combining features from all datasets. 
Profiling of species-enzyme relationships revealed potential interspecies metabolic dependencies 
(Fig. 8a, Supplemental Table 11). The strongest association, identified from approximately 10,000 
statistically significant correlations, was a positive correlation between Anaerolineae sp. HMT-439, 
Desulfobulbus sp. HMT-041 and taurine–pyruvate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.77), an enzyme involved in 
taurine sulfur assimilation, predominantly expressed by Eubacterium, Desulfovibrio and Desulfomicrobium 
species (Fig. 8b). Thus, our integrative analysis identified distinct clusters of highly correlated species and 
enzymes, further distinguishing between active species that directly express these enzymes as shown from 
the EC transcripts assigned to them and other species that, despite lacking expression capabilities, are likely 
to be associated with or dependent on these activities. 
The corresponding microbial taxa (full-16S) and bacteriophages (MTX) analysis identified 14,843 
associations (Supplemental Table 12), from which top ranked associations were compared to identify 
potential phage hosts (Fig. 8c). Phages were typically linked to their host bacteria, except for Fusobacterium 
phages which were associated with Tannerella forsythia, suggesting it may benefit from phage-induced 
lysis. Interestingly, correlation between phage RNA reads aggregated by their hosts and bacterial genera at 
DNA level showed a near-perfect matching (Fig. 8d). 
The microbial taxa (full-16S) and host response genes (MTX) analysis identified 7,482 associations 
(Supplemental Table 13). The top 10 associations comprised five clusters representing nine predominantly 
disease-associated microbial species and seven clusters encompassing 40 host genes (FDR-adjusted q < 7.06 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 13 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
13 
 
∙ 10⁻⁷, Spearman's ρ > 0.67). Unconstrained analysis was followed by an analysis of selected associations 
of representative key biofilm members (Fig 8e). 107 associations were found between representative taxa 
and host genes. They were grouped to 24 hallmark sets. Streptococcus exhibited a distinct profile 
characterized by a high number of negative associations. Neisseria grouped with disease-associated taxa, 
while Fusobacterium clustered closely with T. forsythia. Additionally, P. gingivalis displayed a similar 
profile to that of Treponema. 
At functional level, we identified 36,617 associations between bacterial enzymes (MTX) and host 
response genes (MTX) (Supplemental Table 14). Gingipain R, regarded as one of the most important 
enzymes causally linked to periodontal and peri-implant pathologies34, in cluster with mannase (3.2.1.25), 
was positively associated with 61 host gene clusters representing TNFα signaling (FDR-adjusted q = 6.5 ∙ 
10-35), inflammatory response and 12 other hallmark gene sets. 
Integrative clustering analysis of the most abundant and active elements across four datasets 
consistently depicted the peri-implant ecosystem (Figure 8f). The major distinctions were observed between 
PIH/PIM and PI, which was evident at all molecular and taxonomic levels. 
Discussion 
In this study, we utilized the largest clinical cohort to date with paired microbiome composition and 
metatranscriptomic profiling of implant-associated biofilms to integrate multiple molecular features and 
present the first high-resolution in situ characterization of the peri-implant ecosystem across peri-implant 
health (PIH), peri-implant mucositis (PIM), and peri-implantitis (PI). While overall population dynamics 
aligned with patterns observed in previous studies on microbiome composition 7-9, 12, 14, 35-38, our integrative 
approach, incorporating metatranscriptomics, revealed novel disease-associated features. These findings 
include absolute levels of biofilm activity, active community types, the activity of ecologically relevant 
enzymes and phages, as well as characteristic host response patterns. Furthermore, association testing 
provided a broader context by uncovering potential bacteria-enzyme, phage-bacteria, and microbe-host 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 14 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
14 
 
interactions across different molecular levels. These insights provide a deeper understanding of the 
physiology, ecology and virulence of peri-implant biofilms. 
Both clinical and molecular measurements, including absolute biofilm activity, consistently showed 
that biofilm expansion is a primary driver of the PIM development around implants and contributes  to its 
further progression to PI. Our findings revealed highly conserved enzyme expression among biofilm 
members, pointing to substantial functional specialization and interdependence. Combined with the high 
species diversity, these characteristics may promote strong growth synergies within the biofilm39. 
Additionally, observed variation in host response, including non-canonical response profiles within 
diagnostic groups suggest an important role in biofilm regulation40, 41. 
At RNA level, PIM showed the presence of an alternative community type that emerged in CT III 
alongside the typical composition of known periodontopathogens in CT II.  This community, here described 
for the first time, was characterized by a high activity of Neisseria spp., which are typically being considered 
low-virulent42. Unexpectedly, our correlation analysis suggests that these species elicited host responses 
comparable to those triggered by established periodontopathogens. While some DNA-based clinical studies 
associate Neisseria with PIH11, 14, 36, 37, others link it to PIM6 or less-severe PI38, or report no association but 
generally high abundance43, highlighting a potential dual role in oral health and disease. Several factors may 
regulate Neisseria populations. Bleeding, a hallmark of PIM, provides heme, potentially supporting 
Neisseria dominance44. However, under anaerobic conditions, Neisseria's activity diminishes unless 
alternative electron acceptors, such as nitrate, are available, potentially sourced from diet or biofilm 
metabolism45, 46. This dynamic could explain the presence of CTs with or without high Neisseria activity. 
Our findings suggest that Neisseria may contribute to the early peri-implant pathology in patient 
subpopulations. Further investigation into host-Neisseria interactions in the peri-implant environment is 
warranted to better understand their potential role as a pathobiont. Additionally, experimental47 or 
observational48 longitudinal clinical studies could provide further insights into whether Neisseria activity 
modulates the progression dynamics of mucositis.  
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 15 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
15 
 
For the first time, we specifically analyzed the expression of enzymes previously reported or 
predicted to be ecologically relevant31 aiming to assess their functional significance for the peri-implant 
ecosystem. As expected, key enzymes were involved in oxidative stress generation or reduction, enzyme 
sharing, and metabolic cooperation. While we confirmed several important contributors49-53, we also 
identified ecologically active enzymes and taxa that have not yet been included in existing interaction 
models and warrant further investigation. Community type- or disease state-specific patterns revealed 
potential target interactions for anti-biofilm interventions. Beyond bacterial activity, the peri-implant 
phageome emerges as a significant yet understudied33 component of peri-implant biofilms.  In the present 
study, we uncovered a remarkable diversity of active oral phages and phage-like elements within the peri-
implant ecosystem, consistently identifying them as a key biofilm constituents across diagnostic groups and 
microbial communities. The strong association between Tannerella forsythia and Fusobacterium phages 
suggests that phage-induced lysis may facilitate the expansion of neighboring fastidious species. These 
findings are supported by previous experiments showing that conditioned media from Fusobacterium spp. 
cultures promote the growth of fastidious microorganisms, including Prevotella spp., phylogenetically 
related with Tannerella spp.54. Additionally, the activity of phages with unknown hosts correlated to the 
presence of specific bacterial species, thus uncovering potential hosts such as Capnocytophaga and 
Fusobacterium spp. Our approach could be applied to refine current host assignment methods for phages in 
the future. 
Although plaque-derived host RNA may originate from exfoliated or lysed epithelial and immune 
cells, it reflects the host-microbiome interface in situ and provides valuable, minimally invasive insight into 
localized immune responses. This approach has been increasingly recognized in respiratory microbiome 
studies23, 24, and exploratory analyses of host transcripts from oral samples such as saliva, buccal swabs, and 
gingival crevicular fluid have shown promise55. The comprehensive profiling of the host response across 
disease states associated distinct host activity patterns with each diagnostic group. Notably, upregulation of 
keratinization in PIH (vs. PIM) and in PIM (vs. PI), emphasizes the critical role of keratinized epithelium 
in maintaining peri-implant health. Keratinized epithelium protects mucosal tissues from microbial insults, 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 16 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
16 
 
reducing vulnerability and tissue damage56. Insufficient keratinized mucosa around dental implants has been 
linked to increased plaque accumulation, tissue inflammation, mucosal recession, and attachment loss3, 57. 
These findings suggest that the stability of soft tissues surrounding osseointegrated dental implants 
significantly impacts bone regenerative processes and long-term outcomes. PI was strongly associated with 
inflammatory responses, such as TNF-α signaling via NF-κB, cytokine signaling, interferon signaling, and 
hypoxia. TNF-α is a key mediator of periodontal inflammation and alveolar bone resorption58, 59. The 
detection of host gene expression related to hypoxia in PI corresponds with the observed dominance of 
anaerobes in biofilms, which are major producers of lipopolysaccharides (LPS)60. The hypoxic environment 
may enhance TNF-α and other cytokine expressions in response to biofilm-derived LPS, subsequently 
activating the NF-κB pathway61. Together, these molecular signatures offer a coherent and detailed 
understanding of the pathological mechanisms underlying PI. 
Our integrative analysis revealed an intriguing link between the PI-associated Anaerolineae-
Desulfobulbus cluster and taurine–pyruvate aminotransferase, which is involved in anaerobic respiration in 
Eubacterium, Desulfovibrio, and Desulfomicrobium, as the strongest association. Taurine, a ubiquitous 
sulfonate metabolite, accumulates in inflammatory lesions62, 63. Anaerolineae and sulfate-reducing 
bacterium ‘SRB’ Desulfobulbus  have been associated with periodontal disease64-69, produce virulence 
factors54, 70 and rely on scavenging essential metabolites, due to the loss of some biosynthetic capabilities70-
72. This suggests that taurine-metabolizing Eubacterium spp. and two SRBs (Desulfovibrio and 
Desulfomicrobium) may provide growth factors or aid in the removal of inhibitory metabolites for the 
Anaerolineae-Desulfobulbus consortium. These fastidious and sensitive SRBs have also been linked to 
disease73, 74 75, 76 and may depend on Anaerolineae, e.g., for the breakdown of complex organic compounds 
or the production of growth factors, as a similar interactions were observed in gut for SRBs77.  
Although our study is the first to provide integrative insights into key molecular interactions in peri-
implant health and disease and drivers of dysbiosis by using multi-omics, also certain limitations should be 
considered, such as the lack of spatial information to measure ecological interactions 78. While our sample 
size is the largest in peri-implant metatranscriptomics to date, longitudinal studies are needed in the future 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 17 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
17 
 
to improve the understanding of  biofilm dynamics, validate causal effects and identify population-specific 
responses,. Nevertheless, our integrated multi-omics approach provides a robust framework for future 
ecological and clinical studies, with the ultimate goal of improving diagnostic, preventive and treatment 
strategies for peri-implant disease. 
 
Materials and Methods 
Study design and ethical statement 
The present clinical cross-sectional study was conducted at the Department of Prosthetic Dentistry and 
Biomedical Materials Science, Hannover Medical School, Germany, as part of the ‘SIIRI Biofilm Implant 
Cohort (BIC)’. SIIRI (Safety Integrated and Infection Reactive Implants) is an interdisciplinary initiative 
that aims to recruit hundreds of individuals and monitor their peri-implant microbiome over a period of up 
to 12 years to investigate the development of peri-implant diseases and devise early detection and prevention 
strategies. The study protocol was approved by the institutional ethics committee of the Hannover Medical 
School, Germany (No. 9477). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants that had at least 
one dental implant diagnosed with either peri-implant health (PIH), peri-implant mucositis (PIM) or peri-
implantitis (PI) based on the 2017 World Workshop on the classification of periodontal and peri-implant 
diseases and conditions29. Detailed disease definitions and clinical examination as well as inclusion and 
exclusion criteria are described in Supplementary material. 
 
Sample collection and co-isolation of DNA and RNA 
Peri-implant biofilm samples were collected from six sites per implant using sterile paper points (ISO 35/2.0, 
VDW GmbH) and curettes (HuFriedy Mfg. Co. LLC) to maximize input mass79. Samples were pooled in 
RNAprotect (Qiagen), incubated for at least 5 minutes, and stored at -80°C until further processing. DNA 
and RNA were co-isolated using a published protocol 80, 81 with modifications. The sample collection and 
co-isolation procedures are described in Supplementary material. 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 18 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
18 
 
 
Full 16S rRNA gene amplicons sequencing and RNA sequencing 
Full-length 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing (full-16S) was performed on a PacBio Sequel system, 
followed by bioinformatic analysis using an in-house pipeline82. The dataset included 125 samples with a 
total of 2,012,347 reads, with an average sequencing depth of 13,783 reads per sample. 
For metatranscriptomic analysis (MTX), ribosomal RNA was depleted using the Ribo-Zero Kit 
Epidemiology, and mRNA sequencing was performed on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 (50 or 68 base pairs). The 
quality filtered sequences were mapped to a custom oral metagenome reference created from eHOMD30, 83 
and Pasolli et al.84 and further annotated with eggNOG85. To characterize functional features, counts were 
aggregated based on gene-EC relationships, and taxonomic information86. Phageome was characterized 
using IMG/VR database as reference87. Of 2.7 billion raw reads, 40% mapped to the human genome, and 
1.4 billion were classified as bacterial or viral. 350 million mRNA reads had EC annotation assigned. 
The details of the full-16S and metatranscriptomic analyses are described in Supplementary material. 
Statistical analysis and association testing  
Multivariate analyses were performed using PRIMER v7 with PERMANOVA+88, 89. Bray-Curtis 
dissimilarities or Euclidian distances of untransformed or transformed relative abundances were used for 
hierarchical clustering (group-average linkage, when applicable combined with SIMPROF permutation 
tests) and ordinations (nMDS, PCoA). Variables were compared across groups using PERMANOVA 
followed with testing for multivariate dispersion with PERMDISP. To account forinter- and intra-patient 
variability, PERMANOVA and PERMDISP were performed on profiles averaged across implants with the 
same diagnosis from the same patient. Diversity indices were calculated using DIVERSE. Canonical 
analysis of principal coordinates (CAP) was used to identify features correlated with disease groups. 
Differential expression analysis was conducted using DESeq290 and controlling for patients, with significant 
features (log2 fold-change >1, adjusted p < 0.05). Functional pathway analysis was performed using KEGG 
Mapper for bacterial enzymes91 and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) for host genes92. For univariate 
comparisons, the Kruskal-Wallis test was applied with post-hoc Dunn’s or Wilcoxon Rank Sum test 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 19 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
19 
 
followed by Benjamini-Hochberg correction. For integrative analysis across 16S sequencing (species-level), 
metatranscriptomic bacterial (MTX-B), host (MTX-H), and phage (MTX-P) datasets, samples were 
standardized, filtered to retain features >0.1% in at least one sample, and log(x+1)-transformed. Significant 
associations (FDR-adjusted p < 0.05) were identified using hierarchical all-against-all association testing 
(HAllA)93. 
 
Data availability 
The raw data and the supplementary data files supporting the findings of this study will be made available 
by the corresponding author upon request. All raw sequencing data are deposited to ENA under the 
Bioproject ID: PRJNA119296, which could be accessed after publication of the manuscript. 
STORMS checklist for this study could be accessed via https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15495741  
Acknowledgments 
This study was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – 
SFB/TRR-298-SIIRI – Project-ID 426335750 (SPS, SH, and MSti). Additional support for this study was 
provided by the DFG under Germany's Excellence Strategy (EXC 2155, Project Number 390874280, 
awarded to SH and MSti). WN, SH and MSti would like to thank Ministry of Science and Culture of 
Lower Saxony (Niedersächsisches Ministerium für Wissenschaft und Kultur) for funding through 
BacData, ZN3428. WB and IY are funded by the “Federal and State Program Promoting Female 
Professors”, Grant No. 01FP19068J. We also thank Marly Dalton and Rainer Schreeb for their valuable 
technical assistance. We thank Claudia Davenport for carefully reading and revising the manuscript. 
 
Competing interest 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 20 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
20 
 
References 
1. 
Elani, H.W., Starr, J.R., Da Silva, J.D. & Gallucci, G.O. Trends in Dental Implant Use in the U.S., 1999-2016, and 
Projections to 2026. Journal of dental research 97, 1424-1430 (2018). 
2. 
Derks, J. & Tomasi, C. Peri-implant health and disease. A systematic review of current epidemiology. Journal of 
Clinical Periodontology 42, S158-S171 (2015). 
3. 
Dreyer, H. et al. Epidemiology and risk factors of peri-implantitis: A systematic review. J Periodontal Res 53, 657-681 
(2018). 
4. 
Saleh, M.H.A., Dias, D.R. & Kumar, P. The economic and societal impact of periodontal and peri-implant diseases. 
Periodontol 2000 (2024). 
5. 
Shiba, T. et al. Distinct interacting core taxa in co-occurrence networks enable discrimination of polymicrobial oral 
diseases with similar symptoms. Scientific Reports 6, 30997 (2016). 
6. 
Schincaglia, G.P. et al. Clinical, Immune, and Microbiome Traits of Gingivitis and Peri-implant Mucositis. Journal of 
dental research 96, 47-55 (2017). 
7. 
Ghensi, P. et al. Strong oral plaque microbiome signatures for dental implant diseases identified by strain-resolution 
metagenomics. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes 6, 47 (2020). 
8. 
Belibasakis, G.N. & Manoil, D. Microbial Community-Driven Etiopathogenesis of Peri-Implantitis. Journal of dental 
research 100, 21-28 (2021). 
9. 
Carvalho, E.B.S., Romandini, M., Sadilina, S., Sant'Ana, A.C.P. & Sanz, M. Microbiota associated with peri-
implantitis-A systematic review with meta-analyses. Clin Oral Implants Res 34, 1176-1187 (2023). 
10. 
Li, S. et al. Mucosal bleeding correlates with submucosal microbial dysbiosis in peri-implant mucositis of patients with 
periodontitis. Clin Oral Implants Res 34, 947-957 (2023). 
11. 
Feng, Z. et al. Microbiological and functional traits of peri-implant mucositis and correlation with disease severity. 
mSphere 9, e0005924 (2024). 
12. 
Bazzani, D. et al. Favorable subgingival plaque microbiome shifts are associated with clinical treatment for peri-implant 
diseases. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes 10, 12 (2024). 
13. 
Dutra, T.P. et al. Clinical, immunological and microbiological evaluation of experimental peri-implant mucositis and 
gingivitis in subjects with Grade C, stage III/IV periodontitis background. Journal of Clinical Periodontology 51, 209-
221 (2024). 
14. 
Yu, P.-S. et al. Microbiome of periodontitis and peri-implantitis before and after therapy: Long-read 16S rRNA gene 
amplicon sequencing. Journal of Periodontal Research 59, 657-668 (2024). 
15. 
Alves, C.H. et al. Host-microbiome interactions regarding peri-implantitis and dental implant loss. Journal of 
Translational Medicine 20, 425 (2022). 
16. 
Ganesan, S.M. et al. Biome-microbiome interactions in peri-implantitis: A pilot investigation. Journal of 
periodontology 93, 814-823 (2022). 
17. 
Robitaille, N., Reed, D.N., Walters, J.D. & Kumar, P.S. Periodontal and peri-implant diseases: identical or fraternal 
infections? Molecular oral microbiology 31, 285-301 (2016). 
18. 
Socransky, S.S., Haffajee, A.D., Cugini, M.A., Smith, C. & Kent Jr., R.L. Microbial complexes in subgingival plaque. 
Journal of clinical periodontology 25, 134-144 (1998). 
19. 
Hong, B.Y. et al. Microbiome profiles in periodontitis in relation to host and disease characteristics. PloS one 10, 
e0127077 (2015). 
20. 
Schwarz, F., Derks, J., Monje, A. & Wang, H.L. Peri-implantitis. J Clin Periodontol 45 Suppl 20, S246-S266 (2018). 
21. 
Shokeen, B., Dinis, M.D.B., Haghighi, F., Tran, N.C. & Lux, R. Omics and interspecies interaction. Periodontol 2000 
85, 101-111 (2021). 
22. 
Baker, J.L. Illuminating the oral microbiome and its host interactions: recent advancements in omics and bioinformatics 
technologies in the context of oral microbiome research. FEMS Microbiology Reviews 47 (2023). 
23. 
Rajagopala, S.V. et al. Metatranscriptomics to characterize respiratory virome, microbiome, and host response directly 
from clinical samples. Cell reports methods 1 (2021). 
24. 
Ren, L. et al. Transcriptionally Active Lung Microbiome and Its Association with Bacterial Biomass and Host 
Inflammatory Status. mSystems 3 (2018). 
25. 
Lloyd-Price, J. et al. Multi-omics of the gut microbial ecosystem in inflammatory bowel diseases. Nature 569, 655-662 
(2019). 
26. 
Worby, C.J. et al. Longitudinal multi-omics analyses link gut microbiome dysbiosis with recurrent urinary tract 
infections in women. Nature microbiology 7, 630-639 (2022). 
27. 
Yan, Z. et al. Multi-omics analyses of airway host-microbe interactions in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
identify potential therapeutic interventions. Nature microbiology 7, 1361-1375 (2022). 
28. 
Long, H. et al. Multi-omics analysis reveals the effects of microbiota on oral homeostasis. Frontiers in immunology 13, 
1005992 (2022). 
29. 
Berglundh, T. et al. Peri-implant diseases and conditions: Consensus report of workgroup 4 of the 2017 World 
Workshop on the Classification of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases and Conditions. Journal of Clinical 
Periodontology 45, S286-S291 (2018). 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 21 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
21 
 
30. 
Chen, T. et al. The Human Oral Microbiome Database: a web accessible resource for investigating oral microbe 
taxonomic and genomic information. Database : the journal of biological databases and curation 2010, baq013 (2010). 
31. 
Marsh, P.D. & Zaura, E. Dental biofilm: ecological interactions in health and disease. Journal of Clinical 
Periodontology 44, S12-S22 (2017). 
32. 
Bowen, W.H., Burne, R.A., Wu, H. & Koo, H. Oral Biofilms: Pathogens, Matrix, and Polymicrobial Interactions in 
Microenvironments. Trends in Microbiology 26, 229-242 (2018). 
33. 
Szafranski, S.P., Slots, J. & Stiesch, M. The human oral phageome. Periodontol 2000 86, 79-96 (2021). 
34. 
Imamura, T. The role of gingipains in the pathogenesis of periodontal disease. Journal of periodontology 74, 111-118 
(2003). 
35. 
Kumar, P.S., Mason, M.R., Brooker, M.R. & O'Brien, K. Pyrosequencing reveals unique microbial signatures 
associated with healthy and failing dental implants. Journal of Clinical Periodontology 39, 425-433 (2012). 
36. 
Tsigarida, A.A., Dabdoub, S.M., Nagaraja, H.N. & Kumar, P.S. The Influence of Smoking on the Peri-Implant 
Microbiome. Journal of dental research 94, 1202-1217 (2015). 
37. 
Sanz-Martin, I. et al. Exploring the microbiome of healthy and diseased peri-implant sites using Illumina sequencing. 
Journal of Clinical Periodontology 44, 1274-1284 (2017). 
38. 
Kröger, A. et al. The severity of human peri-implantitis lesions correlates with the level of submucosal microbial 
dysbiosis. Journal of Clinical Periodontology 45, 1498-1509 (2018). 
39. 
Lamont, R.J. & Hajishengallis, G. Polymicrobial synergy and dysbiosis in inflammatory disease. Trends in molecular 
medicine 21, 172-183 (2015). 
40. 
Monje, A., Kan, J.Y. & Borgnakke, W. Impact of local predisposing/precipitating factors and systemic drivers on peri-
implant diseases. Clinical Implant Dentistry and Related Research 25, 640-660 (2023). 
41. 
da Silva, M.K. et al. Genetic Factors and the Risk of Periodontitis Development: Findings from a Systematic Review 
Composed of 13 Studies of Meta-Analysis with 71,531 Participants. International Journal of Dentistry 2017, 1914073 
(2017). 
42. 
Liu, G., Tang, C.M. & Exley, R.M. Non-pathogenic Neisseria: members of an abundant, multi-habitat, diverse genus. 
Microbiology 161, 1297-1312 (2015). 
43. 
Zhou, N. et al. Microbiota analysis of peri-implant mucositis in patients with periodontitis history. Clinical Oral 
Investigations 26, 6223-6233 (2022). 
44. 
Perkins-Balding, D., Ratliff-Griffin, M. & Stojiljkovic, I. Iron Transport Systems in <i>Neisseria meningitidis</i>. 
Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 68, 154-171 (2004). 
45. 
Rosier, B.T., Buetas, E., Moya-Gonzalvez, E.M., Artacho, A. & Mira, A. Nitrate as a potential prebiotic for the oral 
microbiome. Scientific Reports 10, 12895 (2020). 
46. 
Morou-Bermúdez, E., Torres-Colón, J.E., Bermúdez, N.S., Patel, R.P. & Joshipura, K.J. Pathways Linking Oral 
Bacteria, Nitric Oxide Metabolism, and Health. Journal of dental research 101, 623-631 (2022). 
47. 
Zitzmann, N.U., Berglundh, T., Marinello, C.P. & Lindhe, J. Experimental peri-implant mucositis in man. J Clin 
Periodontol 28, 517-523 (2001). 
48. 
Yost, S., Duran-Pinedo, A.E., Teles, R., Krishnan, K. & Frias-Lopez, J. Functional signatures of oral dysbiosis during 
periodontitis progression revealed by microbial metatranscriptome analysis. Genome Medicine 7, 27 (2015). 
49. 
Miller, D.P., Fitzsimonds, Z.R. & Lamont, R.J. Metabolic Signaling and Spatial Interactions in the Oral Polymicrobial 
Community. Journal of dental research 98, 1308-1314 (2019). 
50. 
Hojo, K., Nagaoka, S., Ohshima, T. & Maeda, N. Bacterial Interactions in Dental Biofilm Development. Journal of 
dental research 88, 982-990 (2009). 
51. 
Kuramitsu, H.K., He, X., Lux, R., Anderson, M.H. & Shi, W. Interspecies interactions within oral microbial 
communities. Microbiology and molecular biology reviews : MMBR 71, 653-670 (2007). 
52. 
Zhang, M., Whiteley, M. & Lewin, G.R. Polymicrobial Interactions of Oral Microbiota: a Historical Review and 
Current Perspective. mBio 13, e00235-00222 (2022). 
53. 
Diaz, P.I. & Valm, A.M. Microbial Interactions in Oral Communities Mediate Emergent Biofilm Properties. Journal of 
dental research 99, 18-25 (2020). 
54. 
Vartoukian, S. et al. In Vitro Cultivation of 'Unculturable' Oral Bacteria, Facilitated by Community Culture and Media 
Supplementation with Siderophores. PloS one 11, e0146926 (2016). 
55. 
Deng, Z.-L., Szafrański, S.P., Jarek, M., Bhuju, S. & Wagner-Döbler, I. Dysbiosis in chronic periodontitis: Key 
microbial players and interactions with the human host. Scientific Reports 7, 3703 (2017). 
56. 
Lin, G.-H., Chan, H.-L. & Wang, H.-L. The Significance of Keratinized Mucosa on Implant Health: A Systematic 
Review. Journal of periodontology 84, 1755-1767 (2013). 
57. 
Ramanauskaite, A., Schwarz, F. & Sader, R. Influence of width of keratinized tissue on the prevalence of peri-implant 
diseases: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Oral Implants Res 33, 8-31 (2022). 
58. 
Page, R.C. The role of inflammatory mediators in the pathogenesis of periodontal disease. Journal of Periodontal 
Research 26, 230-242 (1991). 
59. 
Cekici, A., Kantarci, A., Hasturk, H. & Van Dyke, T.E. Inflammatory and immune pathways in the pathogenesis of 
periodontal disease. Periodontol 2000 64, 57-80 (2014). 
60. 
Darveau, R.P. et al. <i>Porphyromonas gingivalis</i> Lipopolysaccharide Contains Multiple Lipid A Species That 
Functionally Interact with Both Toll-Like Receptors 2 and 4. Infection and immunity 72, 5041-5051 (2004). 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 22 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
22 
 
61. 
Chandel, N.S., Trzyna, W.C., McClintock, D.S. & Schumacker, P.T. Role of Oxidants in NF-κB Activation and TNF-α 
Gene Transcription Induced by Hypoxia and Endotoxin1. The Journal of Immunology 165, 1013-1021 (2000). 
62. 
Marcinkiewicz, J. & Kontny, E. Taurine and inflammatory diseases. Amino Acids 46, 7-20 (2014). 
63. 
Sturman, J.A. Taurine in development. Physiological Reviews 73, 119-147 (1993). 
64. 
Abusleme, L. et al. The subgingival microbiome in health and periodontitis and its relationship with community 
biomass and inflammation. The ISME Journal 7, 1016-1025 (2013). 
65. 
Szafranski, S.P. et al. High-resolution taxonomic profiling of the subgingival microbiome for biomarker discovery and 
periodontitis diagnosis. Applied and environmental microbiology 81, 1047-1058 (2015). 
66. 
Belstrøm, D. et al. Periodontitis associates with species-specific gene expression of the oral microbiota. npj Biofilms 
and Microbiomes 7, 76 (2021). 
67. 
Cai, Z., Lin, S., Hu, S. & Zhao, L. Structure and Function of Oral Microbial Community in Periodontitis Based on 
Integrated Data. Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 11 (2021). 
68. 
Iniesta, M. et al. Subgingival microbiome in periodontal health, gingivitis and different stages of periodontitis. Journal 
of Clinical Periodontology 50, 905-920 (2023). 
69. 
Colombo, A.P.V. & Tanner, A.C.R. The Role of Bacterial Biofilms in Dental Caries and Periodontal and Peri-implant 
Diseases: A Historical Perspective. Journal of dental research 98, 373-385 (2019). 
70. 
Cross, K.L. et al. Insights into the Evolution of Host Association through the Isolation and Characterization of a Novel 
Human Periodontal Pathobiont, Desulfobulbus oralis. mBio 9 (2018). 
71. 
Campbell, A.G. et al. Diversity and genomic insights into the uncultured hloroflexi from the human microbiota. 
Environmental Microbiology 16, 2635-2643 (2014). 
72. 
Bernstein, D.B., Dewhirst, F.E. & Segrè, D. Metabolic network percolation quantifies biosynthetic capabilities across 
the human oral microbiome. eLife 8, e39733 (2019). 
73. 
Langendijk, P.S., Hanssen, J.T.J. & Van der Hoeven 
 
 
 
 
, J.S. Sulfate-
reducing bacteria in association with human periodontitis. Journal of Clinical Periodontology 27, 943-950 (2000). 
74. 
Hill, G.B., Ayers, O.M. & Kohan, A.P. Characteristics and sites of infection of Eubacterium nodatum, Eubacterium 
timidum, Eubacterium brachy, and other asaccharolytic eubacteria. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 25, 1540-1545 
(1987). 
75. 
Langendijk, P.S., Kulik, E.M., Sandmeier, H., Meyer, J. & van der Hoeven, J.S. Isolation of Desulfomicrobium orale 
sp. nov. and Desulfovibrio strain NY682, oral sulfate-reducing bacteria involved in human periodontal disease. 
International journal of systematic and evolutionary microbiology 51, 1035-1044 (2001). 
76. 
Loubinoux, J., Bisson-Boutelliez, C., Miller, N. & Le Faou, A.E. Isolation of the provisionally named Desulfovibrio 
fairfieldensis from human periodontal pockets. Oral microbiology and immunology 17, 321-323 (2002). 
77. 
Ye, H. et al. Ecophysiology and interactions of a taurine-respiring bacterium in the mouse gut. Nature Communications 
14, 5533 (2023). 
78. 
Dar, D., Dar, N., Cai, L. & Newman, D.K. Spatial transcriptomics of planktonic and sessile bacterial populations at 
single-cell resolution. Science 373, eabi4882 (2021). 
79. 
Belibasakis, G.N., Schmidlin, P.R. & Sahrmann, P. Molecular microbiological evaluation of subgingival biofilm 
sampling by paper point and curette. APMIS : acta pathologica, microbiologica, et immunologica Scandinavica 122, 
347-352 (2014). 
80. 
Szafrański, S.P. et al. Functional biomarkers for chronic periodontitis and insights into the roles of Prevotella nigrescens 
and Fusobacterium nucleatum; a metatranscriptome analysis. npj Biofilms and Microbiomes 1, 15017 (2015). 
81. 
Grischke, J., Szafrański, S.P., Muthukumarasamy, U., Haeussler, S. & Stiesch, M. Removable denture is a risk indicator 
for peri-implantitis and facilitates expansion of specific periodontopathogens: a cross-sectional study. BMC Oral Health 
21, 173 (2021). 
82. 
Dieckow, S. et al. Structure and composition of early biofilms formed on dental implants are complex, diverse, subject-
specific and dynamic. npj Biofilms and Microbiomes 10, 155 (2024). 
83. 
Dewhirst, F.E. et al. The Human Oral Microbiome. J Bacteriol 192, 5002-5017 (2010). 
84. 
Pasolli, E. et al. Extensive Unexplored Human Microbiome Diversity Revealed by Over 150,000 Genomes from 
Metagenomes Spanning Age, Geography, and Lifestyle. Cell 176, 649-662.e620 (2019). 
85. 
Huerta-Cepas, J. et al. eggNOG 5.0: a hierarchical, functionally and phylogenetically annotated orthology resource 
based on 5090 organisms and 2502 viruses. Nucleic acids research 47, D309-D314 (2018). 
86. 
Jorth, P. et al. Metatranscriptomics of the Human Oral Microbiome during Health and Disease. mBio 5, 
10.1128/mbio.01012-01014 (2014). 
87. 
Roux, S. et al. IMG/VR v3: an integrated ecological and evolutionary framework for interrogating genomes of 
uncultivated viruses. Nucleic acids research 49, D764-D775 (2020). 
88. 
Anderson, M., Gorley, R.N. & Clarke, K. PERMANOVA+ for primer: Guide to software and statistical methods. 
(2008). 
89. 
Clarke, K. & Gorley, R. PRIMER version 7: User manual/tutorial. PRIMER-E 192 (2015). 
90. 
Love, M.I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with 
DESeq2. Genome Biology 15, 550 (2014). 
91. 
Kanehisa, M., Sato, Y. & Kawashima, M. KEGG mapping tools for uncovering hidden features in biological data. 
Protein Science 31, 47-53 (2022). 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 23 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
23 
 
92. 
Subramanian, A. et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide 
expression profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102, 15545-15550 (2005). 
93. 
Ghazi, A.R. et al. High-sensitivity pattern discovery in large, paired multiomic datasets. Bioinformatics 38, i378-i385 
(2022). 
 
 
 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 24 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
24 
 
Figures 
 
Figure 1. Study design. (A) Peri-implant diseases (top). Bone loss is an indicator of peri-implantitis. Radiographs showing crestal 
bone level in a representative clinical case with developing peri-implant disease. Collection of clinical samples (bottom left). 
Characterization of clinical samples (bottom right): For each implant, DNA- and RNA-based analyses were perfomed on the 
different nucleotide fractions of each sample. B-MTX, P-MTX and H-MTX analyses were performed on the same sulcus fluid 
samples. (B) Scanning electron micrograph of a submucosal implant-associated biofilm scraped with a curette from an implant 
diagnosed with peri-implantitis. Length of scale bar: 1µm. Implant image was modified from Zheng, H. et al. Sci Rep. 5, 2015. 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 25 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
25 
 
 
Figure 2. High-resolution composition of implant-associated biofilms. Heatmap indicating relative abundances of the top 
species-level taxa selected by CAP analysis (Pearson |r| > 0.4) across diagnosis groups. Horizontal coloured bars indicating bacterial 
class, vertical bars below heatmap indicating the diagnosis associated with the sample. Samples ordered by hierarchical clustering 
of Bray–Curtis similarity values calculated for log (x +1) transformed standardized species abundance profiles. Species ordered by 
hierarchical clustering of Spearman rank correlation values calculated for log (x +1) transformed standardized species abundance 
profiles. Significant P-values for Mann-Whitney U test for pair-wise comparisons and Benjamini Hochberg correction across 
diagnosis groups. *** P ≤ 0.0001; ** P ≤ 0.001; * P ≤ 0.05 
 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 26 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
26 
 
 
Figure 3. Major active community types at dental implants. (A) Clusters of class-level activity identified by SIMPROF. The 
main clusters representing major active community types (CT) were numbered I to IV and color coded. Composition of active 
community was plotted for every sample. Diagnosis is given below. (B) Inter-patient diversity. Samples originating from the same 
individual highlighted and linked by lines if they are placed in different clusters in spite of the same diagnosis. (C) Most active 
genera. (D) Species correlation networks. 
 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 27 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
27 
 
 
Figure 4. Pathways and modules associated with diagnosis groups. For each of the diagnosis groups, the bar plot displays the 
number of enzymes (ECs) from specific KEGG maps that were correlated with corresponding diagnosis using CAP. Individual 
KEGG modules are listed beside KEGG map bars if at least two members were associated with either PIH, PIM, or both (in cyan), 
or with PI in either or both comparisons (in red). PIH-PI and PIM-PI yielded largely overlapping results for both positively and 
negatively associated features with PI. In contrast, PIH-PIM showed no significant associations. Modules containing both PI-
associated and non-PI-associated enzymes were excluded unless they were clearly dominated by one group (with a difference of at 
least three member ECs). In the brackets following each module name, the number of associated members is shown, if applicable 
minus the count from the opposite group. Consecutive reactions spanning three or more steps not assigned to a KEGG module but 
showing correlation are labeled as custom reactions, indicated by an asterisk. 
 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 28 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
28 
 
 
Figure 5. Unique functions of microbial classes in peri-implant biofilms. (A) Unconstrained ordination of EC-level expression 
data, with the microbial classes in each sample treated as a separate sample, resulting in n=541 pseudo-samples. MDS plot calculated 
on Bray-Curtis dissimilarities for log(x+1)-transformed read counts grouped to enzymes (E.C., relative activity cut-off = 0.1%, 
number of ECs = 1370). Datapoints are colored by class. (B) Shade graph for class activity across samples. Class-
samplecombinations and enzymes were each sorted using hierarchical clustering on Euclidean distances. Same input data as for 
“A”. (C) Shade graph for class-specific activities. ECs which activity was associated with a given class were grouped to KEGG 
maps. (D) The top 60 most highly expressed ECs with predicted ecological relevance were analyzed. ECs were grouped based on 
Spearman correlations, and their expression levels were standardized by their maximum values and visualized as a heatmap across 
diagnostic groups and community types. Below, normalized counts and the composition of producers are illustrated. ECs are color-
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 29 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
29 
 
coded by ecological groups, defined by their associated metabolites, enzymes, and ecological roles. Producer data is presented at 
the class level. 
 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 30 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
30 
 
Figure 6. Active phageome across diagnosis groups. (A) Heatmap for phages grouped by a host. Diagnosis associations are 
indicated by font color. (B) The activity of phages infecting five genera dominated the biofilms and exhibited high diagnosis 
specificity. (C) Most abundant peri-implant phage species (average relative activity cut-off = 1%). Green, blue and orange colors 
represent peri-implant samples from health, mucositis and peri-implantitis, respectively. 
 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 31 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
31 
 
 
Figure 7. Host gene expression across diagnosis groups.  Pathways representing genes correlated with diagnosis groups (ǀ r ǀ  > 
0.25) in CAP. All or top 10 pathways are listed for each comparisons and diagnosis group based on increasing adjusted P value q-
value. Genes representing the top pathway are listed. (Ranges of adjusted p-values from top pathway (from top left graph, 
clockwise): 5.5 ∙ 10-5 – 1.1 ∙ 10-2, 3.2 ∙ 10-29 –  1.0 ∙ 10-21, 1.7 ∙ 10-30 –  1.0 ∙ 10-14, 3.2 ∙ 10-40 – 5.1 ∙ 10-10, 1.2 ∙ 10-32 – 6.0 ∙ 10-10, 2.0 
∙ 10-25 – 1.5 ∙ 10-14. (H) – Hallmark gene sets , (R) – Reactome subset of canonical pathways. Green, blue and orange colors represent 
peri-implant samples from health, mucositis and peri-implantitis, respectively. 
 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint

===== PAGE 32 =====
Szafrański et al., Peri-implant ecosystem 
32 
 
 
Figure 8. Network of interactions between microbial, ecological, biochemical, and host factors. (A) Associations between 
species clusters (at DNA level) and enzymes (at RNA level), with the top 100 associations displayed on the heatmap. (B) the 
strongest association from panel “A”. (C) relationship between phage-associated species and predicted hosts of those phages. (D) 
correlations between genera and phages grouped by their host genus. (E) Relationship between species (at DNA level) and host 
reponse (at RNA level). (F) Integrative clustering analysis of four datasets. 
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.23.661096; this version posted June 25, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
